Rules to the game are better for everyone.
They're better for the people that when they're better for the people that are
coming up, they're better for every, yes,
you'd have to have real structure and real rules.
And that you're better off being a guy like Wayne Gretzky. Yes.
Better off being a guy who's respected and plays the game correctly and just
does his best and really, truly becomes a champion and loved by all.
You're better off in every way. Right. And that's the most state.
The other thing that's so cool about that. So imagine this,
this is the antidote to moral relativism. Okay. So the first thing is,
is that there are real problems and,
and hierarchical organizations can offer real solutions socially and personally.
So you can confront the problems courageously and you can solve.
So that's real it ameliorates suffering and limits malevolence.
And so there's nothing morally relative about that.
The second is that sense of meaning that we discussed.
That's not some philosophical second order consequences of thinking.
It's way deeper than that.
That sense of meaning tells you when you're the God ski.
There's a Russian psychologist called that the zone of proximal development,
which I believe is where the phrase the zone came from.
And so in the zone of proximal development,
this is what adults do with children,
little kids that are learning to talk adults automatically talk to little
children who are learning to talk at a level that slightly exceeds their current
vocabulary. They do that without even knowing it.
And that puts those kids in the zone, right? Cause if you just talk baby,
talk to kids, then all they learn is baby talk.
And if you just talk like an adult,
then they don't understand a word you're saying.
So you'll find this happy medium in between where the kid mostly understands
what you're talking about and that you're pulling them forward.
So that puts them in the zone. That's a meaningful zone.
And so you can feel the operation of that zone in your own life.
That's what the Taoists are on about because they say, well, you Dow is the way,
right? And that's the pathway between chaos and order that's meaning.
And you can feel that in your life when you're deeply engaged in something like
we have deeply engaging conversations. Okay.
Which is part of the reason that we keep having them.
And I think why they're popular and we're not paying attention to how the clock
is ticking or how time is flowing,
or even to the fact that we're doing what we're doing.
We're just having a conversation and it's meaningful. It's engaged.
It keeps our eyes focused and our senses, um,
concentrated on what's happening.
And the reason for that is that there's enough information flowing between us so
that we're being slightly transformed as a consequence of the discussion, right?
So we're both comfortable. We trust each other.
We trust that the conversation is aimed at something that's of mutual benefit.
We trust each other to tell the truth to the,
to the degree that we're capable of doing that.
And then when you engage in this exchange of information and to the degree that
it's breaking you down a little bit and building you up in a different way,
that's a little death and rebirth,
there's constant little deaths and rebirths in a meaningful conversation,
then that keeps you alive and functioning. And that,
that focuses like that,
that speaks to you so deeply that that focus happens without any consciousness
and meaning. And that's that line between chaos and order. And that's real.
That has nothing it's it's uh it's and I would say,
here's another thing that's cool. So that line between chaos and order,
that's the same thing that's happening when you're playing a game property,
right? Because you're in the game and you're, you're exercising your skill,
but you're pushing it,
but you're pushing it in a way that's also a benefit to your teammates and to
the progression of the game as such, and to being a better general player,
you're doing all that at the same time and you're evolved with enough
natural intelligence.
So that the sum total output of your nervous system says to you,
you're in the right place at the right time doing the right thing.
And that's what makes your life meaningful. And that's real.
I think it's more real than anything else.
I think it's more real than suffering.
I think it's more real than malevolence because it's the antidote to both of
those. And so the whole moral route,
moral relativism issue for me as a non-starter, it's just wrong.
There's lots of ways of interpreting the world,
but there aren't very many ways of interpreting it optimally,
and you can feel when you're doing that, it makes you stronger.
And then the people that come to me after my talks and say, well, you know,
I've been putting my life together. I've developed a vision.
I've been trying to be more responsible.
I've been trying to be more honest and put my relationships together.
They're all sparkly eyes because of this or crying sometimes because it's really
had an impact out the month on the Metta deep level, they think, oh, wow,
this actually works. It's like, yeah, it actually works. It's real. It's real.
And I would just say as well,
that that's associated with the idea of the deep Western idea of the logos,
which is meaning inaction and speech. So, you know,
if we have a conversation that's meaningful,
then that's a manifestation of the spirit of the logos.
And that's the thing that destroys and, and,
and recreates at the same time, because you learn something, it destroys,
something destroys a little presupposition that you had that was erroneous and
replaces it with something that's healthier.
And every time you have a meaningful conversation that happens,
it's like a little tweak. Now, it wasn't quite right here,
click that moves and something new takes its place.
So when that's a little death and rebirth,
instead of the catastrophic death and rebirth that you might have to have,
if you weren't paying attention. So that's all tied together,
it's all tied together with that phenomenon, meaning,
and that's the same as the adoption of responsibility that all ties together.
So, so nicely.
Yeah. The concept of meaning, like what is important that it's,
so it's so huge to people, but so fleeting, it's so difficult to like,
what is meaning? Well, you know, there's the simple ones, right?
Like family and loved ones and companionship and community,
and finding something that you enjoy doing that, you know,
you can do that seems bigger than you or bigger than yourself, but,
but meaning like the meaning of life, what is meaning?
And it's one of the things that gives people so much existential anchors and I
think is the cause of a lot of despair because there's.
Well, you can question it. But the thing is,
is that that's one of the dangers of rationality is that see the
Egyptians associated, the Catholics did this to some degree too.
They associated rash rationality with a proclivity to malevolence,
partly because rationality tends to fall in love with its own productions.
Intelligence has this like in-built arrogance and the Egyptians in particular
were really insightful.
They tried to replace the idea of intelligence as the highest virtue with the
idea of attention as the highest virtue is something eldest Huxley knew.
He wrote a book called island island was an island that was populated by had a
lot of birds on it. And the birds could talk. And all they did was say,
pay attention to remind everybody on the island to pay attention all the time.
But you, you can undermine your sense of meaning and you can question it.
But the best thing to do is to actually pay attention to when it manifests
itself, because it's a, it's a phenomenon like,
like color or like, or like love or like beauty. It, it exists. It,
isn't something you create.
It's something that you discover and you can discover it.
You just have to watch like you're ignorant about yourself. You think, okay,
well, I'm gonna, I I've taught,
told my clinical clients to do this with my students.
Students watch yourself for two weeks. Just watch. Like,
you don't know who you are.
And notice when you're doing something that you're engaged in. It's like,
you'll see it.
Maybe it's only 10 minutes because your life is pretty out of balance.
But you'll see that, oh man, I was engaged in something there for 10 minutes.
It's like, why, what was, what did you do that was right. That engaged you,
you were in the right place at the right time doing the right thing for a few
minutes. What was it? What were the preconditions?
There's this line in the new Testament? Christ says,
the kingdom of God is spread across the earth, but men do not see it.
And that's what it refers to is that you, you, you wander into paradise now.
And then when you're engaged, when you're deeply engaged in something,
but you don't notice it, you don't think, oh, look, I'm in the right place.
And everything's working out right now. It means I've got it right somehow.
And then I need to practice being there more and more and more, which is,
well,
that's the appropriate thing to try to practice and that's to make that's to
come to some negotiated, what would you call it?
It's to it's to come to a negotiation with that intrinsic sense of meaning and
to realize it as a fact, rather than, than just as an opinion or,
or something that's secondary, because it's.
Concept for people though,
to be so aware of who they are and what they're doing,
that they could recreate that.
So when they do feel that feeling of meaning that they could figure out a way to
get back into that state and what were all the extenuating circumstances and
where where's my head at, what caused me to have this,
this feeling like things were right. Yeah.
Well, it's like someone gives you a gift and you think, well,
I'd like that gift again. It's like, yeah,
well you have to figure out what it was that you did to deserve it. So to speak.
And yeah, I know it requires a fair bit of re it requires a fair bit of careful
reflection, but it also requires that ignorance is you have to think, well,
I don't know who I am. I'm going to find some things meaningful. What are they?
They might not even be things you want to find meaningful.
They might be things that you might even be ashamed of. You know?
Cause sometimes people are interested in things that they don't think that they
should be interested in. Like maybe you'll you'll have a guy who was, who was,
is kind of a cliche, but who was, um, you know,
socialized to be a real tough guy.
And he finds out that he's kind of interested in art or aesthetics. It's like,
well, he's ashamed of that because maybe it's too feminine or whatever. Well,
it's,
doesn't matter because that's actually speaking that that's actually something
that's speaking to him from the core of his genuine being,
he's going to have to pursue that. Or you might find, you know,
that someone who's really agreeable and kind of a pushover
stands up to someone just once at work, says what they really think.
And then they realize afterwards, wow, you know, that was exactly right.
Then they think, oh my God, you know, I've decided when I was a little kid,
maybe they had a harsh father and they decided when they were four,
I'm never going to be angry. My whole life.
There's something wrong with aggression. So they've gone out of their way,
their whole life to be free of conflict.
And then they find out that one day they stand up for themselves. That,
that whole domain,
that they'd parsed off as inappropriate is actually contains exactly what they
need to put themselves together.
Or do you find what you need where you least want to look?
That's the old El chemical dictum in [inaudible].